gary stevenson is a multi-millionaire
and former trader who wants to see
higher taxes annabelle denham is from
the institute
of economic affairs the uk's free market
think tech
tank and rachel k is a researcher at the
high pay center an independent
non-partisan think tank focused on the
causes and consequences of economic
inequality
with a particular interest in top pay
and annabelle well welcome to you all
first of all annabelle
um can i start with you do you think
anyone can ever be worth 48
000 pounds an hour
well i think we're worth what employers
are willing to
pay us and that depends on us being able
to provide services that consumers are
willing to pay for um you know people
like denise coates they're paid like
that because they're delivering the
goods
and in fact you know the british public
are actually quite
uh sympathetic to the idea that uh
risk-taking entrepreneurs are paid um
or remunerated very highly
um and i think a really important point
to make here is that
denise coates hasn't received high pay
at the expense of others
even if you don't approve of gambling
she's created an incredibly successful
tech company in stoke
that's able to compete on a global level
and the money that she has
earned reflects that and i think too
often
we argue that um
or make the cake the case is made that
in taxing
those at the top or taking money in some
way confiscating assets from those at
the top
it'll somehow trickle down to those at
the bottom that simply isn't the case
ultimately the market for top talent and
the market for low-skilled labor are
simply separate markets and you cannot
help low earners
with knee-jerk eat the rich policies
and how do you know that the british
public are in favor of such
massive remunerations
well i mean polling has kind of
consisten
recently shown that the public are not
sympathetic to the argument that we
should tax somebody like denise coats
more and they do believe that some
my salaries are justified and are
broadly comfortable with
entrepreneurs earning large amounts of
money what people
do sometimes struggle with is the idea
or they're less happy with the idea that
senior company employees
are paid very well because often people
don't
see the value they don't necessarily
notice
that that individual is producing
value but that's that's not the case i
mean just to go back to my original
point where
people are paid what employers are
willing to pay
contingent on on their skills gary
you've probably earned 48 000 pounds in
an hour at some point in your career
and how did you feel about it or how do
you feel about it
uh i don't think i ever quite made it to
48 000 pounds an hour um
so look i'm from a poor background and i
made money and i know how important it
is for people from poor backgrounds
to be able to make money so um you know
annabelle said something really
interesting there which is about this is
the market for top talent look i've been
in that market for top talent
i understand that market helps poor
people make money but let's look at what
actually happened here right
so annabelle coach she gets paid uh
denise coat sorry she gets paid 480
million pounds
what was that market like okay so who is
the owner of the company
well that is actually denise code so
denise coates owns them
so when she looked around the market for
who were the best ceos well she picked
and then when she decided how much to
offer herself to convince herself to
take that job she chose
480 million pounds so when we look at
that it doesn't really look to me like
she's
really taken the most talented person
there because she herself she is the
owner of the company
she owns the company she decided to hire
herself as ceo
to pay herself 480 million pounds i
don't think really this is a case of big
companies picking the best talents
i think this is a case of very very
wealthy people from very very wealthy
families
paying themselves as much as they want
yeah i mean and then let's move away
from from denise because she's
merely an example and and one of the
more recent ones that we've talked about
a new 31 year old
billionaire on the forbes list today as
well i mean rachel
a new billionaire was created every 17
hours during the pandemic
do you think that the the wealth divide
will continue to grow
if if governments don't tackle the issue
in some way i mean i'm i'm listening to
annabelle and and gary's points but but
it is escalating is it not and there has
to come a point where where perhaps that
divide starts to shrink rather than
expand
yeah absolutely is escalating i i wanted
just to go back
before i answer this question to the
point raised by annabelle because i
think it's actually really important to
address some of the ideas behind those
so
i think it's fair to say that most
people would accept that those
who run successful businesses should be
paid more than average
but there's a really important question
of proportionality here um
so it's obviously not proportional to
how hard she's worked because
her pay award is about 15 000 times the
median pay for full-time work in the uk
that would be ridiculous indeed but but
leaving her salary aside because you
know i think gary's gone into it in
detail as has
annabelle just the idea that you know
she's not the only person who's been
paid
you know significantly more uh
than you know the vast majority of the
population 99
of the population actually yeah exactly
and it's a good point actually
i really um don't think it's uh
worth attacking individuals because this
is about a wider
structural problem of how wealth is
distributed within companies and with
in society more widely um yeah so
moving away from her i think there's a
commonly made argument um
that annabelle made which is that it's
fine for ceos to be paid a huge amount
because they're responsible for creating
a huge amount of wealth
um but that's a myth um firstly because
wealth creation is collective so ceos
rely on
the workers who work for their companies
they rely on public spending
on the education and healthcare systems
that ensure that they have a skilled and
educated workforce to draw on
and they also rely on transport
infrastructure for example that moves
their products around
um and i'd say also it's a myth that the
wealthy will create
value by investing their wealth um and
that therefore society benefits from
wealthy people
because actually many of the capital
gains made by the wealthy today are from
extracting value rather than creating
value so the wealthy overwhelmingly
put their money into unproductive and
speculative investments such as property
for example which
may generate high returns for them as
the investable which don't expand the
productive potential of the economy
and the same applies to how sorry
go ahead the same applies to how most
business leaders
are rewarded because executives pay an
increasingly tied share price
um executives are rewarded with the
option to buy
shares which means that ceos have a very
direct incentive
to increase the share price and this
frequently results in
quite strange practices such as share
buy back to their companies we use their
profits to buy back their own shares and
artificially
inflate the share price and therefore
their own salaries
um so they'd actually say that the
wealthy aren't necessarily creating
value for economies and for the economy
and towards society and
indeed yeah thank you thank you for that
i mean alouette has has written in has
tweeted me um
and i as i said he wanted to take it
away from denise coats she just happens
to offer a very good example at the
moment but
aloe has tweeted me saying 80 personal
income tax denise coates brought in 380
million
in taxes didn't she and gary that there
is that and also the fact that doesn't
um get
mentioned very often in reports of of
what denise coates earned which is that
um the company also paid 85 million into
her
charitable foundation so can we rely
uh when people get super rich and make a
lot of money
can we rely on the the tax that they pay
and uh their philanth their philanthropy
or their tendency toward philanthropy
in order to level things out you know
what mariella i really really wish that
we could rely on the taxes that they
paid
and i really wish that they all did pay
their taxes but unfortunately if we look
at the very wealthiest people in society
and then we look at how much taxes they
paid in the cases where we can see that
they often pay very very low percentage
of tax overall compared to their income
much less than
you or i or you know often much less
than lowly paid people such as cleaners
or nurses they end up paying very very
low rates of tax um
philanthropy is obviously fantastic yo i
say congratulations to everybody who's
made enough money they can give money
to philanthropy to charity um but the
fact is if we try and rely
on philanthropy to fix our broken
economy rather than a fair tax system
that works
it's certainly not going to work we'll
see a condition of what we've seen up
until now
which is more and more money flowing to
the richest while ordinary hard-working
families can't afford to buy houses
annabelle that is the problem isn't it
that the tax system
doesn't really seem to be fair
it doesn't seem to level out and it does
seem that the super rich
end up paying a fraction of what the
rest of us pay
out of our you know monthly salaries or
whatever and that
in a way is part of what fuels the the
discord and the resentment
and the sense that it is entirely
unequal
well i mean certainly our that our tax
system
requires um fundamental change um it
needs to be
massively simplified and at the moment
there are areas um
yes where it works for the super wealthy
and where
it does not work for um those who are
among the poorest in our society so i
absolutely would support the notion of
tax reform i think there are just a few
interesting points made earlier in the
discussion i'd like to come back on
first we talked a little bit about
wealth inequality
well that has actually been pretty much
constant for
many decades when it comes to income
inequality
there was a sharp rise in the junior
coefficient in the 1980s because we
moved towards an economy where we had
winner takes all income distributions we
moved away from industries like
manufacturing and towards things like
finance and entertainment and leisure
where the turnover in top salaries is
very high
however since the early 1990s we haven't
seen an increase in income inequality so
that's quite a misleading
narrative that is pushed into the public
domain and is simply
um inaccurate i've also just come back
on one of the points made earlier around
this idea that um you know ceos have
equity in
the business and are therefore
incentivized uh to
raise the share price i find it quite
extraordinary that anybody would think
that that was
a bad thing surely we want our ceos to
have skin in the game and be
invested in the success of the company
that they are perhaps on the senior
management
team for or indeed running um
rachel do you agree about that disparity
in terms of
of of wealth gain do do you agree that
it hasn't
been exacerbated in in recent years and
do you want to respond to
annabelle's point there about uh ceo's
incentivization in enlisted companies
yeah well um ceo
pay has gone up substantially since
the 1980s um but i mean says the cost of
living that doesn't really mean anything
in in real terms does it
uh yes it does i mean it's gone up a
huge amount um
much more than the cost of living has
gone up um
so and even
in percentage terms
yes yeah um and wealth inequality has
also increased
um so i mean there are lots of different
ways of measuring this
um so yeah
depending on how you measure it um you
can come up with different conclusions
um but the i mean the high pay center
looks at ceo
compensation and that's gone up hugely
um so that will obviously have
implications for the wealth of those
individuals as well because obviously
when you
earn more you can therefore invest in
in assets and so on and then on the
point about
yeah sorry go ahead
um the point about incentives so it
hasn't always been the case
that um ceo pay and executive pay has
been aligned with
shareholders and this is actually a
development that happened
around the 80s and
previous to that the company was more
seen as
the purpose of the company was about
increasing production and
long-term investment um whereas there
are
a range of different policy developments
that led to
the purpose of the company being more
about short-term profit
and purely about creating sharehol or
primarily about creating value for
shareholders and okay let me put that
together
gary is that something that that you
that you agree has happened that change
since the 1980s
well i think there's definitely a change
in the way that um companies behave and
um you can definitely see there's a lot
of pressure to push up share prices but
i just want to mention just something
quickly on
where the wealth inequality has
increased because i think this is really
really important you know i'm a wealthy
quality economist i look at this every
day
i talk to top global experts in this
such as aaron advani at work university
gabriel zuckman at berkeley
and they say that there is no doubt that
the share of world held by the super
rich and the top note one percent has
massively increased
the reason that people sometimes say
that it hasn't it's because they're
looking at data which is coming from
surveys where they say if you fill in
this server
we'll give you a 15 pound amazon voucher
now i don't think you'll be surprised to
find that the super rich
tend not to fit in these surveys for a
15 amazon voucher so i just want to say
i'm talking to the top economist every
day about whether wealth inequality is
increasing
they're confident that it definitely is
annabelle
um yeah okay well i mean i don't think
that we're necessarily going to
um ci to either i suppose i would just
but but surely this is a factual
situation
well i i mean you know i've read plenty
of research from economists that suggest
that the genie coefficient hasn't
uh what is the gina coefficient what is
inequality haven't changed over the last
uh 30 years
longer for wealth uh inequality but you
know rather than squabbling over that i
suppose i would just
pose another question to your other
panelists which is
you know let's let's say that in in
common wealth and equality
the chasm is widening on a fast scale
one year from one year to the next
but let's also say that everybody is
getting wealthier so we're able to
improve the living standards to the
poorest in society even if the
top not not one percent are getting
wealthy of welfare that's the question
isn't it
that's the question isn't it is is is is
everyone yes but
is everyone getting wealthier i mean
i've just been talking to someone
coming up with a new commission talking
about food poverty in the uk with five
point million
uh 5.9 million adults enduring food
poverty and 1.7
million children so actually when you
look at the figures it doesn't suggest
that that people that society
in in general is getting richer i mean
gary this is something that you sort of
bet on if i can put it like that i mean
that's how you've made a lot of your
money
it's it's quite um in congress in a way
that that you were so committed to
leveling up and and to fairness and at
the same time
your fortune has been in large been
based on
on working out who's going to whose
economies are going to collapse
yeah you know i didn't come into this
world wanting to be an inequality
economist no
i'm from east london i come from a poor
background i wanted to make money
my job was to figure out when the
economy would recover um the history
that is so fascinating because the
economist predicted every single year
since 2008
that we would recover next year so i had
to understand why the economy is always
wrong
i came to the conclusion that it's
because they don't understand the
damaging effects of inequality on the
economy
in my opinion if we don't fix inequality
that will mean all of the money goes to
the rich who use it to buy house prices
none to use it to buy houses pushing
house prices up none of it will go to
the rest of us and the economy will be
weak
so so do we think the economy won't
improve
how do we stocks in inequality i mean
you're a former trader now
multi-millionaire but you
actually want to see higher taxes so do
you see higher taxes
as the answer yeah i think definitely
higher taxes have to be part of the
solution but i'm really
um it's really important to emphasize
when i talk about this those taxes
shouldn't be on ordinary working people
you know
this story about denise coats is a
perfect example of how things work
her father was a multi-millionaire when
she was a teenager with a betting empire
now she's a multi-millionaire with the
betting empire where i'm from in ilford
people have houses
only if their parents had houses you
know so we're in a situation where you
can only be rich if your parents are
rich
but we need to go after those super
super rich families rather than just
make a change to the taxes and are going
to end up hitting ordinary working
people so for me
it needs to be taxes but it needs to be
on the super rich but
of course um and annabelle i'm sure will
agree with this whenever
uh you know extremely high rates of tax
have been introduced
then an awful lot of the super rich
whether we like it or not
have have moved to other tax domains
haven't they so so annabelle
is it is it i don't know is it about
incentivizing people
is it about a reformed tax system that
means that you can't just i mean i know
that there has already been a lot of
work done
in terms of sort of closing down those
kind of tax loopholes and tax havens
but you know what what are the answers
to make it fairer
you know forgetting the the disparity
and how great it is
yeah i mean just to go to my previous
point you know i think that
my the point i was making is just that
we can fixate on high pay
and it distracts from the very important
issues of labor that's why i'm saying
let's not talk i wasn't dismissing that
yes um as you say
people are we know that um
the wealthy are very sensitive to tax
risers and we know
that um if you increase uh income tax
for instance then
it can lead to lower revenues for the
treasury so it's something that you need
to
approach very carefully i would rather
not
solely look at the cost of living crisis
through
the prism of government intervention how
can price controls or regulation or
higher minimum wages
um address the cost of living a crisis
i'd rather look at how
government intervention actually raises
the cost of living for a lot of people
look at
housing look at child care um there are
areas that
government regulation is is driving up
costs and that is
contributing to the cost of living
crisis and that is what
i would like to address rather than
having this rather simplistic approach
of
let's just tax wealthy people more as
though that won't have
an impact on people's behaviors and
potentially
you know hit those perhaps in the middle
hit those at the lower
um end of the income scale rather than
um
isn't it about cultural change as well
though because
you need people to want to pay taxes
because actually we all benefit
from taxes being paid and and and the
country actually being
you know operating well as a result of
the fact that we pay taxes you can't
enjoy
having dustbin men and roads fixed and
all of those things if you don't pay
your fair share of tax
and that does seem to be a particular
issue in this country but but rachel you
know
um 8.8 pounds 92 is the is the
latest level for the minimum wage and
according to the high pay center over
half of britain support the introduction
of a maximum wage
and a hundred thousand a pound cap would
hurt
less than three percent of earners i
mean what what do you think about a wage
cap i'm sure that annabelle's going to
be
vehemently uh opposed to it but what are
your thoughts
is it even workable yeah so
the piece of research we did about that
um wasn't about fleshing out a concrete
policy proposal but it was actually
rather about demonstrating just how much
potential there is for redistribution in
the uk
in terms of raising the pay of lowest
earners um so i think
i'd want to think much more carefully
about it as a policy proposal before
saying definitively yes or no but
i think the main point actually here is
um
that just having a wage capital just as
angola said um
thinking about taxes taxing the rich um
is kind of skirting around a larger
problem that workers are really
disempowered um and have become more
disempowered
over the last few decades so trade union
power has like
has rapidly declined um and
basically workers don't have the
majority of workers don't have much of a
say
in how their company is run and in the
decisions that affect
their daily lives and there's plenty of
research showing that
um high levels of trade union influence
are connected to fairer wages and also
better working conditions
um so i'd say where we actually need to
start with this is to think about how
can
workers have more power in terms of
determining their own working lives so
i mean they invest their labor and their
minds and their bodies so it makes total
sense that they would actually
um be involved in this decision okay
we're we're running out of time i'm
afraid very fast so i want to ask all of
you just very very briefly if you had a
magic wand
um or you know what would be the very
first thing that you would do
in order to try and make things a bit
less a bit more equitable uh gary
i think for me the wealth tax which is
being spoken about
that is the key that is one that's going
to fix it for us and if we could have
that
uniformly across europe and in the u.s i
think that would do a massive amount to
improve
economic life for ordinary people that
is a dream and that is a magic wand
instance isn't it do you not think that
wealthy people just move off to
monaco or wherever well i mean if you
look at the 60s where we had high
hacks on the rich all across europe
there was nowhere they could go you know
every country has this problem
every country has the same problem of
the wealthy taking way too much and
leaving not enough for the rest of us so
we need to work together to fix it and
then they can't run away annabelle
well i mean the vast majority of
companies that have introduced wealth
taxes have later abandoned them which
is a pretty strong indicator that they
don't work um i think that
you know we have a nearly five million
people still on the furlough scheme when
it is unwound unfortunately
a lot of those people are not going to
have jobs to return to that might be in
hospitality or retail or the other
sectors that have been particularly hard
hit by the pandemic
sorry we're just coming up to the news
annabel yeah oh
yeah go on very briefly yeah we need to
have a flexible
uh labour market we need to try and
deregulate um the employment
and make it as easy as possible for
companies to take on workers
as we emerge from this crisis thank you
very much and rachel
just finally a brief word i mean you've
talked about trades reunions and
empowering workers
yeah exactly redistributing power within
the company um there are various ways of
doing that mandating worker
representation on board
more democratic forms of company
ownership and expanding trade union
rights
well thank you all very much indeed gary
stevenson annabelle denham and rachel k
thank you for joining me here at times
radio this is mariela frost on times
radio
at the moment these guys are profiting
from a crisis
that is going to keep our economy in the
stump for 50 years
there is one other thing they can do
with that mass amount of income
they can buy your mom's house
[Music]
you